************************************* Code Book **********************************************

This document provides information about the tidy data generated by the script run_analysis.R, also provided in this repository. 
The script performs step-by-step manipulation of the given "raw/messy data" to produce "tidy data" that conforms to the principles of tidy data.


** Description of the data **
The data was produced from an experiment conducted to analyse human activity recognition using smartphones. 
The experiment was performed on 2 different study groups, test and train, a total of 30 subjects. 

Source of the data:
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

Raw data provided for the project:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip 


** Description of the code **

The function DeriveAndWriteDataSets from the script run_analysis.R writes two datasets, tidy1.csv and tidy2.csv. The first one, tidy1 is the result of a cleaning and selection of the data described in Original data set. The second one, tidy2.csv is the result of an aggregation of tidy1.csv.
Data set tidy1.csv

The dataset tidy1.csv is the result of cleaning and selecting data from data from an experiment in which measurements were collected from the accelerometer and gyroscope from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone used by 30 subjects carrying out a variety of 6 activities. More information about the measurements in the raw dataset is best obtained from the website where the dataset was taken from: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones For your convenience we have included information about the original data in the section Original data set.

Here follows a description of what tidy_data.txt looks like.

    The first variable "subject" denotes the subject number that performed an activity. In total there are 30 subjects.

    The second variable "activity" denotes the activity performed by the subject. There are six activites, listed here:

    WALKING
    WALKING_UPSTAIRS
    WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
    SITTING
    STANDING
    LAYING

A total of 66 features were selected from the original data: only those that correspond to estimated mean and standard deviation measurements. These features form the 66 other variables in the dataset, making a total of 68 columns. Please note that features corresponding to mean frequency such as The feature names from the original data have been rewritten, using the following rules:

    The prefix "t" was rewritten as "time", to make it clear the feature corresponds to the time domain
    The prefix "f" was rewritten as "freq", to make it clear the feature corresponds to the frequency domain
    Dashes and parentheses have been removed since they are not allowed in R variable names
    Naming errors have been removed. Variable names having "BodyBody" have been replaced by "Body"
    Camel case naming notation has been applied to the names

For example:

    tBodyAcc-mean()-X becomes timeBodyAccMeanX
    fBodyAcc-std()-Z becomes freqBodyAccStdZ
    fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean() becomes freqBodyGyroMagMean


A full description of the features is best obtained from the file features_info.txt, included with the original dataset (I found it unnecessary to duplicate all the information here).
Data set tidy2.csv

Next, the observations from tidy1.csv were grouped by subject and activity and then aggregated using the mean function. This yields 180 rows (30 subjects times 6 activities) and 81 columns (1 for subject, 1 for activity plus 79 aggregated features).
Original data set

Taken from http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones:

"The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain."

For more information read visit http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones, the website where the original data came from. 


 ** Data Dictionary for Tidy Data Set **
 
Structure of tidy data set: Data frame
Dimensions of tidy data set: 180 * 68, plus a header row with descriptive variable names for the columns.
 
Fixed variables a.k.a dimensions:
The tidy data set is grouped by both of these dimension variables.

subject                    1 
                           Subject identifier - type integer
                           1 - 30     Unique identifier assigned to each subject(volunteer) in the experiment.
			
activity	               1
       		               Activity identifier - type factor
			               1 - 6      Unique identifier assigned to each activity performed by the subject.
						 
			               1 - WALKING
			               2 - WALKING_UPSTAIRS
			               3 - WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
			               4 - SITTING
			               5 - STANDING
			               6 - LAYING
			
			
Measured variables:	
	
There are 66 measured variables in the tidy data set. 
They are averages of either mean or standard deviation (normalized and scaled)measurements, calculated from the original data. 
All the variables are of type double (numeric) and are of slightly variable length, with most of the numbers having a precision of 15 digits.
Since the measurements are normalized, they are unitless.
The numbers fall within the range [-1,1].

Glossary of component terms in the measured variables:
time - time domain of the sensor signal.
freq - frequency domain of the sensor signal.
Acc  - the linear acceleration component of the sensor signal obtained from accelerometer readings.
Gyro - the angular velocity component of the sensor signal obtained from gyroscope readings.
Body - the body motion component of acceleration or angular velocity.
Gravity - the gravitational motion component of acceleration.
Jerk - derivative of linear acceleration or angular velocity with respect to time.
Mag - magnitude component of linear acceleration or angular velocity without considering the direction.
JerkMag - magnitude component of jerk(derivative of linear acceleration or angular velocity) without considering the direction.
Mean - mean for several readings of that particular measurement.
Std  - standard deviation for several readings of that particular measurement.
X, Y, Z - 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions of the smartphone.

The full list of measured variables in the tidy data set and their brief description:
Note: The values in the tidy data set are averages of the said measurements for each subject-activity combination

1.  timeBodyAccMeanX        - mean linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
2.  timeBodyAccMeanY        - mean linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Y axis     
3.  timeBodyAccMeanZ        - mean linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

4.  timeBodyAccStdX         - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
5.  timeBodyAccStdY         - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
6.  timeBodyAccStdZ         - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

7.  timeGravityAccMeanX     - mean linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer on X axis
8.  timeGravityAccMeanY     - mean linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
9.  timeGravityAccMeanZ     - mean linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

10. timeGravityAccStdX      - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer on X axis
11. timeGravityAccStdY      - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
12. timeGravityAccStdZ      - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

13. timeBodyAccJerkMeanX    - mean jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
14. timeBodyAccJerkMeanY    - mean jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
15. timeBodyAccJerkMeanZ    - mean jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

16. timeBodyAccJerkStdX     - standard deviation of jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
17. timeBodyAccJerkStdY     - standard deviation of jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
18. timeBodyAccJerkStdZ     - standard deviation of jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

19. timeBodyGyroMeanX       - mean angular velocity measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on X axis
20. timeBodyGyroMeanY       - mean angular velocity measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Y axis
21. timeBodyGyroMeanZ       - mean angular velocity measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Z axis

22. timeBodyGyroStdX        - standard deviation of angular velocity measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on X axis
23. timeBodyGyroStdY        - standard deviation of angular velocity measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Y axis
24. timeBodyGyroStdZ        - standard deviation of angular velocity measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Z axis

25. timeBodyGyroJerkMeanX   - mean jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on X axis
26. timeBodyGyroJerkMeanY   - mean jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Y axis 
27. timeBodyGyroJerkMeanZ   - mean jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Z axis

28. timeBodyGyroJerkStdX    - standard deviation of jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on X axis
29. timeBodyGyroJerkStdY    - standard deviation of jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Y axis
30. timeBodyGyroJerkStdZ    - standard deviation of jerk measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Z axis

31. timeBodyAccMagMean      - mean magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer 
32. timeBodyAccMagStd       - standard deviation of magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer

33. timeGravityAccMagMean   - mean magnitude measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer 
34. timeGravityAccMagStd    - standard deviation of magnitude measurement for time domain of the gravitational motion of the accelerometer

35. timeBodyAccJerkMagMean  - mean jerk magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer 
36. timeBodyAccJerkMagStd   - standard deviation of jerk magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the accelerometer

37. timeBodyGyroMagMean     - mean magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope
38. timeBodyGyroMagStd      - standard deviation of magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope

39. timeBodyGyroJerkMagMean - mean jerk magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope
40. timeBodyGyroJerkMagStd  - standard deviation of jerk magnitude measurement for time domain of the body motion of the gyroscope

41. freqBodyAccMeanX        - mean linear acceleration measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
42. freqBodyAccMeanY        - mean linear acceleration measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
43. freqBodyAccMeanZ        - mean linear acceleration measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis

44. freqBodyAccStdX         - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
45. freqBodyAccStdY         - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
46. freqBodyAccStdZ         - standard deviation of linear acceleration measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

47. freqBodyAccJerkMeanX    - mean jerk measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
48. freqBodyAccJerkMeanY    - mean jerk measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
49. freqBodyAccJerkMeanZ    - mean jerk measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

50. freqBodyAccJerkStdX     - standard deviation of jerk measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on X axis
51. freqBodyAccJerkStdY     - standard deviation of jerk measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Y axis
52. freqBodyAccJerkStdZ     - standard deviation of jerk measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer on Z axis

53. freqBodyGyroMeanX       - mean angular velocity measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on X axis
54. freqBodyGyroMeanY       - mean angular velocity measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Y axis
55. freqBodyGyroMeanZ       - mean angular velocity measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Z axis

56. freqBodyGyroStdX        - standard deviation of angular velocity measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on X axis
57. freqBodyGyroStdY        - standard deviation of angular velocity measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Y axis
58. freqBodyGyroStdZ        - standard deviation of angular velocity measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope on Z axis

59. freqBodyAccMagMean      - mean magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer
60. freqBodyAccMagStd       - standard deviation of magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer

61. freqBodyAccJerkMagMean  - mean jerk magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer 
62. freqBodyAccJerkMagStd   - standard deviation of jerk magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the accelerometer
 
63. freqBodyGyroMagMean     - mean magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope
64. freqBodyGyroMagStd      - standard deviation of magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope

65. freqBodyGyroJerkMagMean - mean jerk magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope
66. freqBodyGyroJerkMagStd  - standard deviation of jerk magnitude measurement for frequency domain of the body motion of the gyroscope



** Sample Input **
data <- read.table("./tidy_data.txt", header = TRUE)
View(data)

** Expected Output **
"tidy_data.txt" -- a text file saved to your working directory, containing the tidy data set with the afore-mentioned variables, and with correct calculations of values.
https://github.com/gaiatri/Getting_and_Cleaning_Data/blob/master/tidy_data.txt - a copy of the same file from the GitHub repository.	

References:
1. https://class.coursera.org/getdata-010/forum/thread?thread_id=49

